Consistent Replica Read RFC (#14)
tikv/rfcs: text/2018-11-24-consistent-replica-read.md

# Summary

> `Consistent Replica Read` supports consistent read on the follower replica or 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Consistent Replica Read* supports consistent read on the follower replica or 
```

> learner replica, which can reduce the read load on the leader. `Consistent 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
learner replica, which can reduce the read load on the leader. *Consistent 
```

> Replica Read` also useful in OLAP scenario or backup scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replica Read* also useful in OLAP scenario or backup scenario.
```

The key to achieve consistent read on the replica is `ReadIndex`, which 
introduced in chapter 6 of the (raft 
thesis)[https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/~ongaro/thesis.pdf].

# Motivation

> Currently, All read requests are handled on the leader, load balance only by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, All read requests are handled on the leader, and load balanced only by the
```

> `balance leader` operator, there are lots of limitations. On one hand, we hope 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`balanceLeader` operator, there are lots of limitations. On one hand, we want 
```

I think this is the correct name?

> a way to improve read throughput and divert load away from the leader. and On 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a way to improve read throughput and divert load away from the leader, on 
```

> the other hand, hope some nodes support read-only service and handle some heavy 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the other hand we want some nodes to support read-only service and handle some heavy 
```

analytics queries.

# Detail design

## Consistent Replica Read

> As summary said, the key to implementing `Consistent Replica Read` is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As summary said, the key to implementing *Consistent Replica Read* is 
```

`ReadIndex`, which already implemented in our 
(raft-rs)[http://github.com/pingcap/raft-rs] library. For now, some read 

> requests already use `ReadIndex` policy to handle, as the following steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requests are already handled using the `ReadIndex` policy. It follows these steps:
```

1. Determine the policy of the read request. If the request is required to 
check the quorum, the replica is a leader and expired the lease, or the replica 

> is a follower or a learner, should use `ReadIndex` policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is a follower or learner, it should use `ReadIndex` policy.
```

> 2. Got `ReadIndex` from the raft library. Assign a `uuid` for the request and 

Reviewer: ```md
2. Got `ReadIndex` from the raft library.
```

Got what?

> invoke the `read_index` API of the raft library with the data that encoded by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invoke the `read_index` API of the raft library with the data that was encoded by 
```

`uuid`. then the raft state machine will notify our apply state machine with 
the `read_status` through the `Ready` message. and we can get the `ReadIndex` 
and `uuid` from the `read_status`.
3.  Read data according to the state of applying. If the `apply_index_term` 
equal to the `current_term`, the request can be processed, rather than will 
push to the pending queue.
**Note**: For the leader, the request can be processed if the 
`apply_index_term` equal to the `current_term`. For the follower and the 

> learner, should let `apply_index` greater than or equal to the `ReadIndex`.

Reviewer 2: hi, @nolouch , I am a little bit confusing here. Because i think for ensuring linearizability read, even for the leader, we still need wait  apply_index greater than or equal to the commit_index. Why we can handle read request when apply_index_term equals to the current_term?

Author: In TiKV, the write request is successful after the `apply` is finished. If the write request actually succeeded in that term, the `apply_index` will greater than or equal to the write entry index. the read request after it will read the newly written data.

> In order to distinguish the replica reading, will add an option in the request 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to distinguish the replica reading, we will add an option in the request 
```

> context. the option mark whether to allow the replica to read. the other logic 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
context. This option will mark whether to allow a replica to read, other logic remains the
```

same as before.

## ReadIndex API

> In order to let the AP engine can read data same as `Consistent Replica Read`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to let the AP engine read data the same as *Consistent Replica Read*,
```

> TiKV will provide a special API, which response the request with the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiKV will provide a special API, which respond to the request with 
```

`ReadIndex`. AP engine may need to handle the request same as described above.

# Drawbacks

> Consistent Replica reading will slightly slower than leader reading. because of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Consistent Replica Reading* will be slightly slower than leader reading because of 
```

> the extra RPC. So it's more useful for the heavy read request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the extra RPC, so it's more useful for the heavy read request.
```

# Alternatives
## ReadIndex API

> For avoiding the extra logic in the AP engine, the ReadIndex API response the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid extra logic in the AP engine, the `ReadIndex` API responds to the 
```

client whether it can start reading. The request message from the client:

>     ```protobuf

Reviewer: This doesn't need to be indented.

    message ReplicaReadRequest {
        Context context = 1;
        apply_index =2;
    }
    ```
If the `ReadIndex` less than the `apply_index` in the request, TiKV will 

> responses `TRUE`, ranther than `FLASE`. and the client should do retry for the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
responds `TRUE`, otherwise it responds `FLASE`. and the client should retry for a 
```

# Consistent Replica Read

## Summary

*Consistent Replica Read* supports consistent read on the follower replica or
learner replica, which can reduce the read load on the leader. *Consistent

> Replica Read* is also useful in OLAP scenario or backup scenario.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Replica Read* is also useful in OLAP or backup scenarios.
```

> The key to achieve consistent read on the replica is `ReadIndex`, which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The key to achieve consistent read on the replica is `ReadIndex`, which was
```

> introduced in chapter 6 of the [raft

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
introduced in Chapter 6 of the [Raft
```

thesis](https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/~ongaro/thesis.pdf).

## Motivation

> Currently, all read requests are handled on the leader, and load balanced only

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, all read requests are handled on the leader, and load balancing is performed only
```

> by the `balanceLeader` operator, there are lots of limitations. On one hand, we

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by the `balanceLeader` operator, which have lead to many limitations. On one hand, we
```

> want a way to improve read throughput and divert load away from the leader, on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
want a way to improve read throughput and divert load away from the leader; on
```

> the other hand we want some nodes to support read-only service and handle some

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the other, we want some nodes to handle read-only services and some of the
```

heavy analytics queries.

## Detail design

### Replica Read

> As summary said, the key to implementing *Consistent Replica Read* is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As indicated in the Summary section, the key to implementing *Consistent Replica Read* is
```

> `ReadIndex`, which already implemented in our

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ReadIndex`, which has already been implemented in our
```

[raft-rs](http://github.com/pingcap/raft-rs) library. For now, some read

> requests are already handled using the `ReadIndex` policy to handle, It follows

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
requests are already handled using the `ReadIndex` policy. It follows
```

these steps:

1. Determine the policy of the read request. If the request is required to

>    check the quorum, the replica is a leader and expired the lease, or the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   check the quorum, the replica is a leader with an expired lease, or the
```

>    replica is a follower or learner, it should use `ReadIndex` policy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   replica is a follower or a learner, it should be using the `ReadIndex` policy.
```

> 2. Got the latest `CommitIndex` from the raft library. Assign a `uuid` for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Get the latest `CommitIndex` from the raft library. Assign a `uuid` for the
```

   request and invoke the `read_index` API of the raft library with the data

>    that was encoded by `uuid`. Then the raft state machine will notify our apply

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   that was encoded by `uuid`. Then the raft state machine will notify our applying
```

>    state machine with the `read_status` through the `Ready` message. And we can

Reviewer 3: what is "apply state machine"?

>    get the latest `CommitIndex` throught the corresponding `uuid` from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   get the latest `CommitIndex` through the corresponding `uuid` from the
```

   `read_status`.

> 3. Read data according to the state of applying. If the `ApplyIndex` greater

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Read data according to the state of applying. If the `ApplyIndex` is greater
```

>    than or eqaul to the the coresponding latest `CommitIndex`, the request can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   than or equal to the corresponding latest `CommitIndex`, the request can
```

Reviewer: @nolouch Missed this one

Author: fixed.

>    be processed, rather than will push to the pending queue until it can be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   be processed. Otherwise, it will be pushed to the pending queue until it can be
```

   processed.

> **Note**: Currently, we only handled read requests on the leader, so we have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Currently, we only handle read requests on the leader, so we have a
```

> few optimizations. One is the request can be processed if the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
few optimizations. One of them is that the request can be processed if
```

> `apply_index_term` equal to the `current_term` because we only return success

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`apply_index_term` equals to the `current_term` because we only return success
```

> `apply_index_term` equals to the `current_term` because we only return success

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`apply_index_term` equals to the `current_term`, as we only return success
```

> after apply. The another one is the local read based on the lease. However, if

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
after apply.  Another one is local read based on the lease. However, if
```

> the follower received a read request, the read requests on the leader must go

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the follower receives a read request, the read requests on the leader must go
```

through the normal flow of the `ReadIndex` policy to ensure linear consistency.

> This is because the apply status of the follower not guaranteed to be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is because the apply status of the follower is not guaranteed to be
```

> consistent with the leader, the apply status of the follower may be newer than

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
consistent with the leader.
```

> consistent with the leader, the apply status of the follower may newer than the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consistent with the leader, the apply status of the follower may be newer than the
```

the leader.

> In order to distinguish the replica reading, we will add an option in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to distinguish the replica reading process, we intend to add an option in the
```

> request context. This option will mark whether to allow a replica to read,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the request context., which will mark whether to allow a replica to read.
```

> other logic remains the smase as before

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
other logic remains the same as before.
```

> other logic remains the same as before

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Other logics remains the same as before.
```

### ReadIndex API

> In order to let the AP engine read data the same as *Consistent Replica Read*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order for the AP engine to read data the same way as *Consistent Replica Read*.
```

TiKV will provide a special API, which responds to the request with the latest

> `CommitIndex`. AP engine may need to handle the request same as described above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`CommitIndex`. The AP engine may need to handle the request as described above.
```

## Drawbacks

> *Consistent Replica Reading* will be slightly slower than leader reading which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Due to extra RPC load, *Consistent Replica Reading* will be slightly slower than leader reading.
```

> is caused by the extra RPC. It's more useful for the heavy read request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's more suitable for scenarios with heavy read requests.
```

## Alternatives

### ReadIndex API II

> To avoid the extra logic in the AP engine, the `ReadIndex` API responds to the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To avoid extra logic in the AP engine, the `ReadIndex` API responds to the
```

> client whether it can start reading. The request message from the client:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
client whether it can start reading. The request message from the client is as shown below:
```

```protobuf
    message ReplicaReadRequest {
        Context context = 1;

>         apply_index =2;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        apply_index = 2;
```

    }
```

If the `ReadIndex` less than the `apply_index` in the request, TiKV will

> responds `TRUE`, otherwise it responds `FLASE`. and the client should do retry

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
responds `TRUE`, otherwise it responds `FALSE`. And the client should do retry
```

> responds `TRUE`, otherwise it responds `FALSE`. Ssnd the client should do retry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
responds `TRUE`, otherwise it responds `FALSE`. Then the client should retry
```

> for a `False` response.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
for a `FALSE` response.
```

# Consistent Replica Read

## Summary

*Consistent Replica Read* supports consistent read on the follower replica or
learner replica, which can reduce the read load on the leader. *Consistent
Replica Read* is also useful in OLAP or backup scenarios.

The key to achieve consistent read on the replica is `ReadIndex`, which was
introduced in Chapter 6 of the [Raft
thesis](https://ramcloud.stanford.edu/~ongaro/thesis.pdf).

## Motivation

Currently, all read requests are handled on the leader, and load balancing is
performed only by the `balanceLeader` operator, which have lead to many
limitations. On one hand, we want a way to improve read throughput and divert
load away from the leader; on the other hand, we want some nodes to handle

> read-only service and some of the heavy analytics queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
read-only services and some of the heavy analytics queries.
```

> read-only service and some of the heavy analytics queries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
read-only services and some of the heavy analytics queries.
```

> ## Detail design

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Detailed designs
```

> ### Replica Read

Reviewer 3: Use sentence style for second level- heading?
```suggestion
### Replica read
```

As indicated in the Summary section, the key to implementing *Consistent
Replica Read* is `ReadIndex`, which has already been implemented in our
[raft-rs](http://github.com/pingcap/raft-rs) library. For now, some read
requests are already handled using the `ReadIndex` policy. It follows these
steps:

1. Determine the policy of the read request. If the request is required to
   check the quorum, the replica is a leader with an expired lease, or the
   replica is a follower or a learner, it should be using the `ReadIndex`
   policy.
2. Get the latest `CommitIndex` from the raft library. Assign a `uuid` for the
   request and invoke the `read_index` API of the raft library with the data
   that was encoded by `uuid`. Then the raft state machine will notify our apply

>    state machine with the `read_status` through the `Ready` message. And we can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   state machine with `read_status` through the `Ready` message. And we can
```

Reviewer 3: We would say the `read_status` parameter (variable, option)
or just `read_status` to indicate the same.

>    get the latest `CommitIndex` through the corresponding `uuid` from the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   get the latest `CommitIndex` through the corresponding `uuid` from
```

   `read_status`.

> 3. Read data according to the state of applying. If the `ApplyIndex` is greater

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Read data according to the state of applying. If `ApplyIndex` is greater
```

Reviewer 3: A typical pattern of using the here wold be **the** `ApplyIndex`  policy/argument/option (any belonging category).
~~the~~ `ApplyIndex`  (NO category name followed). This applies to other similar instances in this article.

Reviewer 3: A typical pattern of using the here wold be **the** `ApplyIndex`  policy/argument/option (any belonging category).
~~the~~ `ApplyIndex`  (NO category name followed). This applies to other similar instances in this article.

   than or equal to the corresponding latest `CommitIndex`, the request can be
   processed. Otherwise, it will be pushed to the pending queue until it can be
   processed.

> **Note**: Currently, we only handle read requests on the leader, so we have a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note**: Our current implementation to handle read requests on the leader allows us a 
```

> few optimizations. One of them is that the request can be processed if

Reviewer 3: This sentence looks a bit confusing "we only handle read requests on the leader, so we have a
few optimizations" means this fact that "we only handle read requests on the leader" allows us to have optimizations, or it is the reason why we need to do optimizations?

Author: "we only handle read requests on the leader" allows us to have optimizations @dcalvin

Reviewer 3: See suggested edit in line.

`apply_index_term` equals to the `current_term`, as we only return success

> after apply. Another one is local read based on the lease. However, if the

Reviewer 3: No need to add an article here since it does not mean a specific thing. "based on lease" is fine.  
```suggestion
after apply. Another one is local read based on lease. However, if the
```

follower receives a read request, the read requests on the leader must go
through the normal flow of the `ReadIndex` policy to ensure linear consistency.
This is because the apply status of the follower is not guaranteed to be
consistent with the leader, for instance, the apply status of the follower
may be newer than the leader.

In order to distinguish the replica reading process, we intend to add an

> option in the request context, which will mark whether to allow a replica to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
option in the request context to mark whether to allow a replica to
```

read. Other logics remains the same as before.

### ReadIndex API

In order for the AP engine to read data the same way as *Consistent Replica

> Read*. TiKV will provide a special API, which responds to the request with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read*, TiKV will provide a special API to respond to the request with the
```

Reviewer 3: Looks more concise this way.

Reviewer 3: Looks more concise this way. :)

latest `CommitIndex`. The AP engine may need to handle the request as described
above.

## Drawbacks

Due to extra RPC load, *Consistent Replica Reading* will be slightly slower than
leader reading. It's more suitable for scenarios with heavy read requests.

## Alternatives

### ReadIndex API II

To avoid extra logic in the AP engine, the `ReadIndex` API responds to the

> client whether it can start reading. The request message from the client is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
client whether it can start reading or not. The request message from the client is
```

as shown below:

```protobuf
    message ReplicaReadRequest {
        Context context = 1;
        apply_index = 2;
    }
```

> If the `ReadIndex` less than the `apply_index` in the request, TiKV will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If `ReadIndex` is less than `apply_index` in the request, TiKV will
```
